[docs] Add consolidated Architecture page (#4379)
drud/ddev: docs/content/users/basics/architecture.md

# How DDEV Works

> DDEV is a [Go](https://go.dev) application that stores its configuration in [files on your workstation](#directory-tour).  

Reviewer: Think we need to mention golang here? Not generally sure people normally need to know that.

Author: I do! It’s an essential part of what DDEV is, which is perfect for this page. Just like the “Look But Don’t Touch” section, it’s about getting comfortable with the tool and what it does.

It uses those blueprints to mount your project files into [Docker containers](#container-architecture) that facilitate the operation of a local development environment.

> DDEV writes and uses [docker-compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) files for you, which is a detail you can cheerfully ignore unless you’re Docker-curious or [defining your own services](../extend/custom-compose-files.md).

Reviewer: `Docker-curious` :)

Maybe you should start a new website with that title :)

## Directory Tour

> A project’s `.ddev` directory can be intimidating at first, so let’s take a look at what lives in there.

Reviewer: Should we make a distinction here between project .ddev and global .ddev? This is clear enough, but people do stumble on that sometimes. Maybe add another tip? Say that the project directory and global have different purposes and global is in homedir?

Author: I didn’t even consider that, but yes! It seems vital to make room for this, not in a tip but expanding the page since DDEV’s global directory is equally important even if you don’t see it as much. Let me incorporate your other suggestions and come back to this.

!!!tip "Yours May Differ Slightly"
    You may have some directories or files that aren’t listed here, likely added by custom services.  

>     For example, if you see a `solr` directory, it probably pertains to a custom Solr [add-on service](../extend/additional-services.md).

Reviewer: Well done!

Author: I only repurposed what was already there!

> You may have some directories or files that aren’t listed here, likely added by custom services. For example, if you see a solr directory, it probably pertains to a custom Solr add-on service.

`apache` directory
: Default Apache configuration when using `webserver_type: apache-fpm`, which [can be customized](../extend/customization-extendibility.md#providing-custom-apache-configuration).

`commands` subdirectories

> : Built-in and custom [shell commands](../extend/custom-commands.md) that can run on the host or inside a container.

Reviewer: I think there are not built-in custom commands in the project .ddev any more.

```suggestion
: Project custom [shell commands](../extend/custom-commands.md) that can run on the host or inside a container.
```

`docker-compose.*.yaml` files
: Where Docker-friendly users can provide their own [custom compose files](../extend/custom-compose-files.md) that add or override services. Read more in [Additional Service Configurations & Add-ons](../extend/additional-services.md) and check out examples in [ddev-contrib](https://github.com/drud/ddev-contrib).

`homeadditions` directory
: Files to be copied into the web container on startup. You could use this, for example, to override the default home directory contents (`.profile`, `.bashrc`, `.composer`, `.ssh`), or include scripts that you’d like to be available inside the container. (You can do the same thing globally in `~/.ddev/homeadditions`.) Check out the [homeadditions docs](../extend/in-container-configuration.md) for more.

`mutagen` directory
: Contains `mutagen/mutagen.yml`, where you can [override the default Mutagen configuration](../install/performance.md#advanced-mutagen-configuration-options).

`mysql` directory
: Contains [optional `mysql` or `mariadb` configuration](../extend/customization-extendibility.md#providing-custom-mysqlmariadb-configuration-mycnf).

> `nginx` directory (deprecated)

Reviewer: Also link to nginx snippets. (I got talked out of deprecating)
```suggestion
`nginx` directory
```

: Can be used for add-on nginx snippets.

`nginx_full` directory
: Contains the nginx configuration used by the web container, which [can be customized](../extend/customization-extendibility.md#providing-custom-nginx-configuration).

`postgres` directory
: Contains `postgres/postgresql.conf`, which can be edited if needed. Remove the `#ddev-generated` line at the top to take it over.

`providers` directory
: Contains examples and implementations to demonstrate how the [`ddev pull`](../basics/commands.md#pull) command can work with [hosting providers](../providers/index.md).

`web-build` directory
: Can be used to provide a [custom Dockerfile](../extend/customizing-images.md) for the web container.

`xhprof` directory
: Contains the `xhprof_prepend.php` file that can be used to customize [xhprof](../debugging-profiling/xhprof-profiling.md) behavior for different types of websites.

> ### Look But Don’t Touch

Reviewer: Nice!

`.dbimageBuild` directory
: The generated Dockerfile used to customize the `db` container on first start.

`.ddev-docker-compose-base.yaml`
: The base docker-compose file used to describe a project.

`.ddev-docker-compose-full.yaml`
: The result of preprocessing `.ddev-docker-compose-base.yaml` using `docker-compose config`. Mostly it replaces environment variables with their values.

`.gitignore`
: The `.gitignore` is generated by DDEV and should generally not be edited or checked in. (It gitignores itself to make sure you don’t check it in.) It’s generated on every `ddev start` and will change as DDEV versions change, so if you check it in by accident it will always be showing changes that you don’t need to see in `git status`.

`.global_commands`
: Temporary directory used to get global commands available inside a project. You shouldn’t ever have to look there.

`.homeadditions`
: Temporary directory used to consolidate global `homeadditions` with project-level `homeadditions`. You shouldn’t ever have to look here.

`.webimageBuild` directory
: The generated Dockerfile used to customize the web container on first start.

### Global Files

> There’s only one global `.ddev` directory, which typically lives in your home folder: `~/.ddev` or `$HOME/.ddev`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There’s only one global `.ddev` directory, which lives in your home directory: `~/.ddev` (`$HOME/.ddev`).
```

Author: Is there a standard way of referring to the home directory path? I’m used to seeing `~/.ddev`, which may be overly Mac/Linux-specific, and the parenthetical seems clunky here. If there’s a winning convention I’d love to be more consistent about it in the docs.

Reviewer: Unfortunately, people just don't understand no matter what you say. And then they make big mistakes, like thinking that /home is their home directory. I'm open to better things as well, but have been burned many times by people not understanding the basic concept of "home directory".

Author: > Unfortunately, people just don't understand no matter what you say.

I’d like to take a stab at explaining it carefully and sticking to a convention, then!

It’s probably worth introducing the concept along with any other fundamentals and sticking to a convention for it. Something like:

> DDEV stores its global files in your home directory, which you may know as your user directory depending on what operating system you use. Throughout the documentation we’ll use the Linux+Mac convention of using `~` to represent that directory. You can use a terminal to navigate to that directory using `cd ~` on Linux or macOS and `cd %HOMEPATH%` on Windows. (...)

Is there a style of referring to the home directory that you’d prefer so the docs can be internally consistent? (Can’t possibly help a confused person to refer to it differently on various pages.)

Reviewer: * FYI, just `cd` goes to homedir
* Explaining the convention `~` is a great thing.. but it won't help the 99% who don't read through.
* Most people (hopefully) on traditional Windows use git-bash, so hopefully `cd` or `echo $HOME` is good enough there as well.
* There are some people who use PowerShell. So %HOMEPATH% doesn't work for them. Oh the permutations! Few people use cmd.

`global_config.yaml`
: This YAML file defines your global configuration, which consists of various [config settings](../configuration/config.md) along with an important `project_info` key that lets DDEV keep track of the projects you’ve added.

`bin` directory

> : This is where DDEV stores executable binaries it needs, like `mutagen` and `docker-compose`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: This is where DDEV stores private executable binaries it needs, like `mutagen` and `docker-compose`.
```

`commands` directory
: Directory for storing DDEV commands that should be available in containers, like `npm`, `artisan`, and `drush` for example. These are organized in subdirectories named for where they’ll be used: `db`, `host`, and `web`. You can add your own [custom commands](../extend/custom-commands.md) here.

`homeadditions` directory

> : Just like the per-project `homeadditions` directory, files you add here will automatically be copied into the web container’s home directory. In this case of this _global_ homeadditions directory, the files will be copied into **every** web container’s home directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
: Just like the per-project `homeadditions` directory, files you add here will automatically be copied into the web container’s home directory. Files from the _global_ homeadditions directory will be copied into **every** web container’s home directory.
```

> #### Look But Don’t Touch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Look But Don’t Touch (global config)
```

This fixes the docs test complaint. Can be fixed any other way you want.

Author: I guess I’d switch these to “Hidden Project Files” and “Hidden Global Files”.

Again, these files are mostly regenerated on every `ddev start` so it’s best to leave them alone:

`.gitignore`
: Prevents files from getting checked in when they shouldn’t be.

`.router-compose-full.yaml`
: The complete, generated docker-compose directive used for DDEV’s router.

`.router-compose.yaml`
: The base docker-compose directive used in generating `.router-compose-full.yaml`.

> 

Reviewer: Long undocumented...
```suggestion
`router-compose.*.yaml`
: `docker-compose` files with the name `router-compose.*.yaml` can be used to override stanzas in the .router-compose.yaml`

```
